>> Hey, Alex. Hey, YouTube.
>> Hey.
>> Hey. So great to have you here on the channel for a moment,
and in just a minute on Talk By Lawn.
So it's going to be a lot of fun.
We're going to get this look you had inside
the language summit this year,
which is very exciting.
There's a, I think maybe more than normal,
a pretty exciting things going on.
So anyway, let's get into it.
Those of you out in the audience,
Thank you for being here. If you've got thoughts, ideas, questions, comments, put them in the
live chat. If you're here live, if not, thanks for watching the replay. Alex, welcome to
Talk Python To Me. >> Thank you. It's great to be on the show.
Big fan of the pod. >> Thank you. It's fantastic to have you
here. There's so much going on with the Python Language Summit, especially this year. I think
there's quite a renaissance of new ideas to sort of look at the foundations and the fundamentals
of Python. And a lot of it has to do with speed in different aspects. Maybe that's through threading,
or through raw performance, or through reference cutting garbage collection. And so we're going to
dive into all those ideas and more by just talking about your coverage of the Python Language Summit
2022. It's going to be super fun. But before we get to that, let's get to your story. How did you
get into programming in Python and how did you get inside the language summit anyway?
Oh yeah, sure. So I started programming actually only around two years ago.
But my first line of code during the pandemic started off as a hobby. Still actually is a hobby.
Yeah, had to have something to do while staying indoors.
- Exactly, yeah.
- So yeah, so Python is my first language
and I'm entirely self-taught and yeah,
once I started, couldn't stop.
- That's cool.
What kind of things were you looking to build?
Were you just looking to learn a language
or did you have some idea of something you wanted to create?
- So I started, so I was doing a journalism masters
at the time and there's a sub-community
of journal coders, so people who use programming languages
to gather data, scrape the web to find stories, essentially.
So I thought that sounded pretty cool.
Yeah, that sounds very cool.
Yeah, so I started learning Python to help with that.
And then sort of started to realize I actually
enjoyed Python quite a lot, just for its own sake.
So I started building, built a card game using Pygame.
It was one of my first projects,
which was a lot harder than I anticipated.
- All the first projects are.
- Oh yeah, yeah, definitely.
And then built a bad website using Flask.
And then eventually started contributing to open source.
And that's about where I am now.
- Fantastic.
>> Yeah, yeah, that's really cool.
It's interesting that you bring up journalism.
I had Carolyn Stransky on a little while ago,
predated the pandemic.
>> Mm.
>> Is it, did it? Yeah. Maybe not.
I don't even know when the pandemic was.
A couple years ago.
Anyway, we talked about Python.
>> Looks like you just hit before the, before the start.
>> Just before it really, really kicked in.
Exactly.
>> Yeah.
>> We talked about Python and AI and journalism,
And there's a ton of neat things that people are doing
in sort of automate the act of gathering data
and reporting on it, right?
- Yeah, no, it's a really cool space.
I'm not directly employed in journalism
as my full-time job at the moment,
but it's something I'd love to go to dip into again
at some point, definitely.
- For sure.
Yeah, Carolyn was talking about things like
monitoring certain websites like the National Geography,
whatever the foundation there is there
that alerts people about earthquakes.
And I would bring up details and sort of pre-fill
so like some folks in LA, like on the LA Times
or something would get an alert, there's an earthquake.
Here's most of the details.
Just put the details around it and hit publish
within 10 minutes or whatever.
That was, that's pretty cool.
Little beep and they're like, go write your article now.
One of my first projects I tried to do, again,
biting off much more than I could chew,
was there's a, in the UK we have this body
called Historic England, which catalogs
England's old buildings and heritage assets.
And I have this all online,
but it's not like in an easily downloadable form.
You know, you can't just like download the CSV
of the National Heritage List.
So I decided I was going to try and scrape this
from the website.
And of course, the scraping is easy,
but then the data cleaning is a nightmare.
Because there's no consistent format,
and some of it's from the 1950s.
And yeah, it's horrible.
Well, it would have been cool if you could have gotten it right
and shared it with everyone.
I got some way there.
But yeah, it's just way too difficult for one man who's
just started learning a few months ago.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
Well, it's those kinds of projects
that are really good for learning programming.
You know, they're--
- Oh yeah, I learned a ton.
I don't regret it at all.
- Yeah, you're like, here's my goal,
and then you just start frantically searching
for like, well, what are the steps I need?
And then how do I make those steps happen
in my programming language, Python in this case?
And like, you might not normally care
to figure out how do you parse a CSV file out of disk,
but you're gonna have to do it now
because you're trying to, you know, aggregate on,
you know, add onto it, append onto it and so on.
So yeah, those kinds of things are great, great projects.
- Yeah.
- Cool.
All right, well, how'd you get
into the Python Language Summit?
From a journalism anger, from the open source angle,
what was the story here?
- So I was invited in the autumn, I think,
to become a triage with CPython.
So at that point I'd contributed a lot of docs,
documentation fixes,
just something I was pretty good at
because of the journals and masters and yeah.
- You absolutely had a right, so.
- Yeah, you know.
I'd also contributed code to a few modules at that point.
Few small fixes to,
I think, funk tools,
yeah, a few standard lib modules.
So I'd been invited by Ken Jin,
who's one of the typing module maintainers
to become a triage during the autumn.
So that got me onto the CPython developers discord channel.
And then I think it was February or March,
there was a discussion there where a few core devs
were asking who they were gonna invite
to become the blogger this year.
I sort of said--
- You know, Alex does journalism.
- Yeah, like, you know, I've got this master's,
I mean, could maybe I do it?
And they said yes, which is very flattering.
- Yeah, fantastic.
- Great of them, and I really, really appreciate it.
So it's Ukas, Mariata, and Sentil,
this year who organized the Language Summit,
so massive thanks to them for inviting me
to be the blogger this year.
Hugely appreciate it.
- Yeah, that's great.
You must have been also at PyCon then, I'm guessing,
'cause you're at the Language Summit, you're at PyCon.
Yeah, what was your experience there?
Was it a good time?
- Yeah, I had a blast.
It was great.
Yeah, just awesome to meet all these people
I've been doing open source stuff with
online for several months.
Yeah, it was really cool.
Well, I really appreciate these conferences because there's people I work with or talk to in different ways through GitHub, through Twitter, through the podcast, but you don't really get to see them in person because they're not around the world until you show up and have a beer together or hang out together.
Yeah.
- Yeah, I think that was, I mean, the talks were fantastic.
But yeah, that was definitely the best bit for me,
was actually-- - Yeah, that's the same,
same for me, actually.
That's the thing that I dig the most.
All right, let's talk about the Language Summit.
- Sure.
- So maybe tell people really quickly,
what is the Language Summit?
- Sure, so the Language Summit is an event every year
that happens just like the day or two days
before PyCon itself stops.
So most of PyCon is available to just like anybody who's interested in Python,
but the language summit is generally only available to like core developers and special guests.
So it's a bit exclusive. That's not because they want to be like secretive about what's
what's happening in there.
It's more so that it can just be a
sort of frank conversation between friends, I think,
sort of, if that makes sense.
- Yeah, that's where the business
of planning out Python gets done, right?
- Yeah, exactly, yeah.
- It's not the only place.
We have our peps and we have other places
where conversation happens, but it's,
It seems like one of the places where some of the ideas
of the peps are discussed and there's a quick feedback loop
amongst a lot of the core developers.
- Yeah, exactly.
I think it's just get everybody together,
all in one small room, talk Python for a whole day
and then see what comes out of it.
- Awesome, how many people show up there?
How many core developers and other folks?
- Around 30 this year, I think.
So mostly core developers, a few triages,
and a few special guests.
So Zach Hatfield-Dobbs, I think, from Hypothesis was there.
Sam Colvin from Pydantic.
So yeah, a few open source maintainers
outside of the Core Dev team as well.
- Right, right.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, Pydantic's interesting.
Obviously a great library.
It's interesting to me because it kind of,
a lot of its meaningful functionality
is in the way that it breaks with the tradition of Python.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Like, yeah, yeah.
Now all of a sudden don't just mean something,
but like they are the core way in which that library works.
Whereas like most of the time,
it's a suggestion or a hint as the name would suggest.
- Sure, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then the way it's quite coercive as well.
So you don't have to like, yeah.
- Yeah, for sure.
It's, so he's a good guest to have
because he's both got a popular project
and one that's kind of an outlier
to some degree. - It's huge popular,
isn't it?
- Yeah, it sure is.
We've got a SQL model by Sebastian Ramirez,
which is basically take Pydantic models
on top of SQLAlchemy, and you've got Beanie from Roman Wright
and there's some other ones that are just like
sort of using Pydantic as their layer, which is really cool.
So obviously the reason we're chatting today
is this year's summit was covered by Alex Waygood.
That's awesome. - That's me.
- Yeah. - Yay, nicely done.
And so when I saw this article or series of articles,
I guess you might say, come out,
I thought it was really fantastic because like I said,
I think there's just so much that's exciting going on here.
No, it's not, well, we're gonna change the language
a little bit here or there,
but there's stuff that everyone's gonna get.
- There's some really huge stuff in there.
Yeah, thank you. - Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So I thought what we could do for our conversation
is just go in order and just sort of chat through them.
You can give me a sense of what it was like
to be in the room,
what are some of the main ideas of each of these,
and we'll just chat about them.
So the first one was a very exciting project by Sam Gross.
- Yes.
- Who I think works for Meta.
Yeah, I think he's part of the Cinder stuff, yeah.
And this is Python without the GIL or no GIL.
Yeah, go ahead.
- So I don't think he's on the Cinder team,
but yeah, he is working at Meta.
- Right, okay, cool.
Yeah, there's other stuff from Cinder we'll get to later.
But yeah, Python without the GIL or his no-GIL story,
there's been, from a historical perspective,
we've had attempts to remove the GIL
or change the performance characteristics of the GIL
and so on.
And maybe let me just set the stage a little bit
with this GIL or global interpreter lock
for people listening.
When I heard this, the global interpreter lock
means you can only run one statement of Python at a time,
even if it's happening in multiple threads,
I thought, okay, well, this must be some odd constraint
put on the language so that things like threading
are easier for people.
But as I learned more about it,
the real purpose of the GIL has nothing to do
with threading per se, it has to do with memory management.
- Yep. - Right, yeah.
So the way memory management happens in Python,
at least in the primary first pass sense,
is it's reference counted.
So everything, numbers, strings, classes, dictionaries,
they all have a ref count.
And if that ref count ever reaches zero,
it gets deleted as long as there's no cycles.
And the problem is,
if you're gonna change that number on the object,
normally you would have to do that in a thread safe way.
You would lock it.
but that turns out to slow single-threaded Python down
a lot when it's unneeded.
And so the global interpreter lock is there
meant to basically allow for that reference counting
to happen quickly in the single-threaded case.
And that made fantastic sense 30 years ago.
Now that we're sitting here with our 16 and 32 core CPUs,
all of a sudden we might wanna run more than one thread
and get stuff done, you know what I mean?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so that's the history of the GIL.
And so there were other things, like Larry Hastings.
He was there, right?
>>Joseph: Yeah, yeah.
Just to interject for a second, it's
really fun to see how long a project it has
been to try to remove the GIL.
You can go back 10 years ago, and there's
a talk by David Beasley on weird things going on
with the GIL in 2010.
And then I was--
while I was writing this, after the summit,
looking through the archives of past language summit bloggers.
And I think there's three successive years running
where there's presentations about the latest project
to remove the GIL.
But this time, it actually seems like it could happen.
So it's really cool.
It could happen.
Yeah, it certainly could.
Sam Gross's work seems to be the most likely candidate.
In all the other attempts, their challenges have been,
yes, you might remove the GIL, and you
might make the parallel computing faster,
but you're gonna make single-threaded Python
so much slower that we don't want to accept it, right?
If you could say, well, you can use all the cores
in your machine, but now everything runs half as fast,
that's not a huge benefit to a lot of people.
- Yeah, and especially because of the fact
that the Guild's been there for so long,
the vast majority of Python code
is written with only one thread, right?
So it's like, well, it could make Python code faster,
but only if you rewrote all of your code,
which not many people want to do.
- True, the other major problem or challenge that is there
is how does it work with the C extensions
that are so important to making Python work well, right?
NumPy and all those types of things, right?
- Yeah. - Yeah.
So Larry Hastings was there and he worked on the Gilectomy,
which I think is still the best name of all these projects.
The Gilectomy, the removal of the GIL.
Yeah, but it sounds like he thinks that Sam's project
is already farther than his, so that's great.
So maybe tell us a bit about what Sam was proposing there.
- So yeah, so Sam has got this fork of CPython
where he has removed the GIL and it all works.
I think, you know, there's still a few rough edges,
but it all basically works essentially.
So now he is looking to, so if you want to,
you can try that right now.
You can go and download Sam's fork in the gill
and most Python programs will run fine on it.
That's it right there, yeah.
For those watching on YouTube.
- Yeah, I'll put a link in the show notes.
People can check out the GitHub repo
And it's just a fork of CPython and then goes from there, right?
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
And now, Simon is hoping to essentially create a separate mode of CPython that you can enable
with a compiler flag, which would enable Nogail.
So to get exchanges merged into the CPython main branch, essentially.
So that would mean you would have to build CPython separately in order to get a version
of CPython where no-guild would work.
So it wouldn't be like you'd be able to just open up the repl and go import no-guild.
It wouldn't be quite that easy.
But it is a bit of a hassle that it's literally a separate compilation step, a separate binary
and so on.
Yes.
could ship, maybe the CPython distribution,
if this really works out well, could be shipped with that.
Like it could be a set of Python or Python 3
or whatever you type.
It could be Python NG or something like that.
You know, like some extra command you can run,
but at least it would be nice,
at least if you didn't have to literally go find
a different installer and try to avoid the name clashes
of what Python means, you know?
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
And this is a change from his original proposal.
So his original proposal was for a runtime flag.
So that would mean that you would be able to,
I don't know, I don't know how exactly it would work,
but do something like import Nogail and then.
- Yeah, and reading your write up here,
it sounded like Sam has come to the conclusion
that there's too many differences
for a runtime flag to make sense.
And it's gotta be a compiled type of thing.
- Yeah, exactly.
So yeah, so that was his proposal.
- How was the reception?
- So there was,
there were a lot of questions for Sam.
(laughing)
I think there were,
I think like a few of the other proposal presentations
finished under time later on in the summit.
And then we went back and asked some more questions to Sam
because people still have questions.
So I think everybody in the room definitely knew.
So like, it's crazy.
If you look at the viewing figures for these blogs,
like the blog on NoGil is off the charts
in terms of how many people have clicked on it and read it.
- Interesting, okay.
- So it's like, the last time I checked,
it was like 40,000 people had read the No Girl article
and the next highest was 5,000 people.
So there was a huge amount of interest in this feature
and the people in the room knew
that there was a huge amount of interest in this feature.
So I think there's a lot of interest in making this work
if it can be made to work.
But there's just a lot of complications
about how to get there.
So there were a lot of people asking
what exactly the plan is here,
because it's this huge project
that Sam's been working on for months and months.
And how do you merge that into CPython?
You obviously can't have one PR
where you have tens of thousands of lines of code
changed all at once.
So how do you split that up?
How do you, yeah, so I think Sam was looking
for a kind of pre-approval before submitting a PEP.
I think some people were reluctant.
- Taking the temperature of the room to see if it was--
- Yeah.
- If it was welcome or unwelcome, right?
- I think the general mood was sort of cautious,
if that makes sense.
- Yeah.
- It's like, yes, but we'd need to set the plan
before we give our stamp of approval.
That was the kind of vibe I got.
- Okay.
Yeah, there was some feedback from Barry Warsaw
and Itamar Osteriker about the impact it might have
on third-party libraries.
I think Carol Willing also talked about that
'cause especially these C layers
or these native code layers are super common
in the data science space, especially.
So yeah, some conversation about that, right?
- Yes.
Yeah, I think there's a lot of concern about,
you know, with some features new to the language,
for example, with typing,
was added a few releases back,
and I'm very involved with the typing community.
I'm a massive fan of typing.
- I am too.
- Yeah. - Staying not involved.
- Sure.
But you know, it's kind of got a little bit
of a bad name for itself in some ways
because there's some people who go to maintainers
and sort of demand that type hints be added or whatever.
- Right.
- And that's not really fair on the maintainers
because everybody's volunteer doing it for free.
- It is getting easier because one of the complaint,
not complaints, one of the holdups used to be,
well, my library is for Python two and three
and I'm not gonna maintain two versions
and so on and so on, right?
So with the typing, wouldn't work in Python two.
At least now we're generally past that holdup,
but it's still, yeah,
it's an effort that the person might not wanna put out there.
- And again, I'm a TypeShed maintainer.
Yeah, I'm very good at typing.
So yeah.
- Tell people about TypeShed.
TypeShed's pretty cool.
- Oh, sure.
So TypeShed is the repository of stubs
for the standard library
and also a bunch of third-party stubs.
So if you...
TypeShed is like the only version of the standard library
that mypy knows or pyright or pytype or any other type checker.
So they don't actually know what's going on in the real standard library at all.
>> Right.
>> They only know this bundle of stubs in TypeShed.
They don't feel like I'm explaining it very well.
>> Yeah, so I'll put one for app-jers.
These are not py files,
these are pyi files.
>> Yes.
>> If you look at them.
- The implementation is super straight. (laughs)
Information, I don't know.
The implementation of all these is super interesting
because all the functions are dot dot dot
and the default values are dot dot dot.
But what you have is you have function name,
variable name, type, return value, type, or class,
field type, field type, field type, right?
Yeah, so it's like a Python file.
- I suspect some people don't even know.
Yeah, I suspect some people don't even know
that this is a thing you can do
to improve the understanding of editors and stuff, right?
In mypy.
- Yeah, yeah.
So yeah, so a static type checker will use this information
to inform the errors that's flagging on your file
if you use it to check a file.
So if you import appders in your Python project,
and you install types appders, then
mypy will use the type hints from TypeShed to understand,
oh, OK, this appders instance has an app name.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
--of type str.
Do you know what the editors do?
Does PyCharm already have this information?
Does VS Code already have this information?
From other sources or behind the scenes?
- VS Code does use TypeShed completely.
PyCharm, I think mostly uses TypeShed now.
It was kind of--
- They used to have their own way.
- Yeah, I think it was a bit of a journey
for them to move to TypeShed.
I'm not sure if they 100% do yet, but yeah.
- Okay, yeah, very interesting.
Let's see, we were talking about the CPython stuff
and Mr. Hypermagnetic asked,
will CPython ever become RustPython?
They also pointed out that type 10 saves lives.
Saves lives, that's great.
But back to the first question, did that come up?
Did Rust ever come up?
My first thought is that's a pretty far bridge,
but did it come up? - Yeah.
So there is already Rust Python, I think.
You can go and use that if you want to.
Sure.
I think it's quite a long way from becoming the default--
like, default-- from becoming the leading
version of the reference implementation of Python.
Right, right, right.
Interesting.
Yeah, OK.
We can come back to that in a little bit,
because it'll circle its way back a little bit.
Yeah, yeah.
All right.
Let's-- so we're halfway through the show,
and we've got one of our items done.
Fantastic.
>> Yes.
>> Let's go to the next one.
No, we'll pick up speed as we go.
>> Yeah.
>> This other one, this next one is a Per Interpreter GIL,
which actually has been a little bit around from PEP 684,
and it's still in draft mode from Eric Snow.
This also goes back to dealing with the GIL,
And it tries to, instead of remove it, say,
"Well, you know what the GIL does?
Is it makes you have single threaded code."
So what we're gonna do is, if you wanna run a thread,
you just start a new sub-interpreter in the same process.
And sure, it has a gill, but it's meaningless
because there's only one thread per interpreter.
And so it's a way to kind of sidestep that problem, right?
- Yeah, it's kind of funny.
So the first talk is like, "Yeah, let's get rid of the GIL."
And then Eric comes along and says,
But what if we had lots of gills?
The problem is the gills shared.
Yeah.
Although, we got to rename it if there's a per interpreter GIL.
Yeah, it's not global anymore, right?
It should just be a per interpreter ill.
The gill, the G part, the global,
doesn't make sense anymore.
A pill?
I don't know.
Yeah.
A pill?
Yeah, that sounds a little bad.
But it's interesting to point out,
like you pointed out in your article here,
that back in 1997, Guido posted something saying,
"A massive changes for separate thread state management.
All per-thread globals are moved to a struct, which
is manipulated separately."
Basically trying to do the same thing.
And it turns out, though, that through another picture
that you've got laid out here, there's
actually a lot of global state shared
across threads and different things.
That's the problem.
- Yeah.
So I think if I understand it correctly,
and Eric, send me an angry email if I'm doing this wrong.
- I have had him on the show before,
so I'll link to that episode as well.
- Okay, cool.
I think it is impossible, sorry,
possible now to run multiple interpreters
within the same process,
but it just doesn't work very well.
If I understand correctly.
So it's like, right into all sorts of problems,
which is like safety and yeah, race conditions.
>> Okay.
>> There we go.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So it sounds like he's been working on this for a long time.
I think you opened with a funny quote.
Hopefully, the speaker began.
This is the last time I give a talk on this subject.
He's been working on it since 2014.
- Yeah, yeah.
I think at the time he gave the talk,
he was hoping to get it in for 3.11,
but didn't quite make it.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So maybe it'll be 3.12.
Yeah, 'cause 3.11 is already frozen.
Yeah, and it's still in draft mode.
Okay, so that's a good one.
People can check that out.
There's a tension between many of these projects
in that the optimizations one are making
might be complicating the work the others are doing.
- Yeah.
- And that's also true for the next one here,
which actually I think is the biggest news of Python 3.11.
- I completely agree.
- Performance improvements, yeah.
Performance improvements for 3.11.
- Yeah, and I felt like it's a shame
that so many more people read the Nogill one
than this one actually, in a way.
- Yeah.
- Because I've been watching the CPython repo,
I know how much work has been going into this.
And I think it's really impressive.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so essentially the top line news from this
is Python 3.11 is gonna be about 25% faster
than Python 3.10.
And this is,
so this is mainly a result of implementing a pep
by Mark Shannon.
I'm not sure I can remember the number.
- It's known as the Shannon plan.
I'm making Python five times faster over five years
or something like that by doing like this 1.25X per year,
which they did it this year.
That's incredible.
- Yes, yeah.
So yeah, so the main chunk of this is
that there are loads of like small optimizations
that have gone into this,
but a lot of them have to do with
implementing what's called
a specializing adaptive interpreter.
So, this is-- - Okay, what is that?
- Well, so this is essentially an interpreter
that monitors your program as it's running
and spots if you've got like an inefficient byte code
that can do lots of different things.
So like maybe it's an add bytecode that could plausibly--
I'm almost settling in and get some details wrong here.
But maybe it could add two lists together or add two ints
together.
It's just like a generic add bytecode.
And then the specializing adaptive interpreter
will spot, oh, hang on.
OK, we're in a tight loop here.
Only numbers are being-- only ints are being added here.
We can replace this bytecode with a more specialized one,
which will do the same thing faster.
>>Yeah, because there's probably a lot
of checks and different types of bits of indirection
to let it add strings and lists and so on.
But if you know its numbers, it can just be the number thing
without the checks.
>>Yeah, exactly.
So that's known as quickening.
So like as the program is running,
the specializing adaptive interpreter quickens your code
and replaces the bytecode with a more specialized one.
And then, yeah.
And there's actually,
have you heard of Brent Booker's specialist project?
- No.
- So if you look that up on GitHub,
it's a project that he published a few weeks ago, I think.
And it's really cool.
You can see it's like visualizes the way Python 3.11
will quicken your code as it's running.
So I'll send you a, can I send a link?
- Yeah, yeah, send a link.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Give me one second.
So you're pulling that up out in the audience.
Over here,
Tomer points out that they've been following
the faster CPython repository.
And yeah, I'll link to that as well,
Mark Shannon and other stuff,
the ideas for making CPython faster over time
and different things.
Yeah, so very cool.
- Yeah, so that's like that idea is helpful.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Okay, Matt, how to do it.
- All right, let's see, I got you.
Thank you.
Visualizing, it's specializing adaptive interpreter.
Okay.
- Yeah.
- All right, very interesting.
So this is the thing,
PivotSolve specialist is a thing you can do,
and then it'll what?
It'll show you like a printout of the code
where it's actually found improvements?
- Yeah, exactly.
So it will show you where it's quickened your code
and where it's been unable to quicken your code.
So you can see with the, I think the green bits here,
specialist has, yeah, quickened those bits of code,
but the other bits it's been like,
yeah, don't know what to do here.
Gotta leave it as it is.
Yeah.
- Yeah, so for people listening,
if you just pull up the specialist GitHub repository,
which I will put in the show notes,
there's a bunch of pictures and colorized code
showing you where Python 3.11 was able to make it faster
where it wasn't. This is super cool. I had never heard of this.
So yeah, and this is a project by Brant Booker, who's been one of the major
collaborators on the Faster CPython project.
Right. Yeah. OK.
It's coming from the top.
Coming. Yeah. What also is neat is this is not just for 3.11.
3.11 is just that.
They're like only halfway through.
Yeah. So yeah.
- It's pretty well funded too, right?
Like Microsoft has, I think a team of six people
possibly working with Guido and Mark.
- That sounds about right.
- And then also Bloomberg has contributed some resources
or some help.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, it's really got a lot of speed here,
a lot of inertia behind it, I guess I should say.
- And speed, yeah.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, this one, actually, I think this is the big news.
I know that it probably didn't make the biggest splash
of the headlines, but--
- Yeah, and I think it's getting,
because this is gonna make everybody's code faster.
It's not like one small micro-optimization.
It's across the board, so yeah.
- The threading stuff is very exciting and interesting,
but I'm gonna go out on a limb and say,
I think a lot of people think they need it
or they think they want it more than they actually need it.
So for example, if you're running a web site
with APIs and stuff, G-Unicorn or MicroWiz Geat or whatever,
they all spin out a bunch of worker processes
and you can have several worker processes per core,
meaning you're already like saturating every core of the CPU.
So in those scenarios, it's nice,
but it doesn't help that much in terms of a lot of stuff
that you don't really need the threading.
On the data science side, you might,
but at the same time you often,
you're doing the computation in C
or you can use async and await if it's IO bound.
There's a lot of ways where this problem
is actually already solved.
It just doesn't feel like it's solved.
And so this one though, this makes multi-threaded code
faster, single-threaded code faster.
It just makes all the code faster, which is great.
- Yeah, yeah, 100% great.
- Yep, all right, let's see.
What is the next one we want here?
Not this one.
Yeah, so the next one we want to talk about is--
this could be a given it a run for the money.
When the listener asked earlier about Rust
being the reference implementation for CPython,
well, what is it then, RPython?
I don't know.
Maybe CPython isn't the name for it anymore.
the reference implementation for Python.
This one here, Python in the browser,
could put some pressure to move in that direction, right?
So this one has to do with WebAssembly.
Tell us about this.
- Yes, so this is, so for a while now,
there's been a project called Pyodite,
which has been like a third party project,
which has been monkey patching essentially CPython
to get a version of CPython running in the browser.
And PyDite has been the basis for several cool projects,
which are all sort of just starting to take off now.
I feel like we've sort of reached this like critical point
where it's all finally sort of starting to fit together
and make sense.
And over the last two years, Christian Himes,
core developer and contributor Ethan Smith
have been working to upstream loads of these changes
that Pyodide has been making to CPython itself,
which would mean that Pyodide doesn't need to
monkey-pax CPython nearly so much anymore.
And CPython essentially will just work in the browser,
which would be huge. - Yeah, there was a bunch
of changes, yeah, that's fantastic.
There were a bunch of changes made to make this possible.
And I can't remember where in the article you said, but.
- There's a specific.
- Over 60 PRs.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, and a GitHub issue, right?
- Yeah, that's the one.
You can just like see.
- Consider supporting mscripten/webassembly
as a build target.
And guess what?
That's now a thing.
Now you can actually go in and say,
--with mscripten target equals browser
as to compile CPython.
And that's a big deal, I think.
It's gonna make it possible to use Python
where you would have otherwise used JavaScript.
- Yeah, for sure.
So I think this is possibly one of the biggest gripes
that anybody using Python for web development has,
that they have to use JavaScript.
- Yeah, people will say sometimes to me
that I'm being mean or inconsiderate or something
when I say that we might not want to write in JavaScript.
You're like, why are you hating on JavaScript?
I think the frustration that a lot of people
feel in the software industry is not that they necessarily
hate JavaScript, that JavaScript is the only option.
There's almost nowhere else in programming where we go,
there's one language and one runtime, and that's it.
That's all you get to use, period.
on the desktop, on embedded, on the web,
like on server-side web,
you can pick tens of languages at least, right?
And you pick the one that works well for you
and the one you like, except for in the browser.
Everyone is forced to do this one language,
which is frustrating.
And so as Python developers, where we like Python,
it would be great if we could continue to use a language
that we prefer for things like this, right?
- And now you can.
There's a few challenges with this.
One is that the WebAssembly binaries are a bit large.
Not huge, they're not huge,
but they're like five or 10 megs instead of 50k.
So that's a bit of a challenge.
But there's places where this is already highly valuable.
So for example, if you're doing like an Electron.js app,
you could write that largely in Python
using this stuff already.
- Yep.
- And it doesn't matter
'cause you already downloaded an entire copy of Chrome.
What's another 10 megs?
You know, is it 200 or 205?
Like I don't care, it's the same, you know?
- Yeah, yeah.
I think, yeah.
I think Simon Willison might've done that a few weeks ago.
Just, yeah.
- Okay.
- Creating an Electron.js app with PyScript?
- Yeah, I think so.
- Okay.
- I could, yeah.
- I'll have to look into that.
That sounds really fantastic.
Let's see, so this is cool because PyIodized is great,
but it's like this sort of project maintained
alongside CPython.
And this is saying the core developers
and the team behind Python are allowing you
to just compile a limited version directly, right?
- So I could say build on top of this one
and not have to maintain their own copy.
- Exactly, yeah.
So we do need to be careful here.
Like it's,
M scripts in the WebAssembly are not fully supported
by CPython yet.
- Yeah.
- So there was a lot of concern about that at the summit.
Like if we say it's supported now,
then it's a big statement to put out there.
So definitely not fully supported yet.
- Yeah, okay.
Good to point that out.
- And there's plenty of things that are not supported
because they're probably not just haven't,
they're not ready.
And there are some things that will never ever be supported.
Like TK inter support is probably never coming
to the browser.
You know what I mean?
Or other things that are not permitted by the browsers,
sandboxing rules and so on.
- Yeah, so obviously if you,
anything that can be run in the browser
needs to be extremely security conscious
because nobody expects to have arbitrary code
executed on their browser.
- Yeah, and it sounds very, very suspicious.
Like, you're gonna let me run binary code in the browser,
but it's subjected to exactly the same rules as JavaScript,
and JavaScript gets jit compiled to binary code
and then run anyway.
It just feels better that it's like, oh, here's a script.
It's like, no, it's the same thing.
So very cool.
I do wanna just point out,
give a quick shout out to PyScript, which you also did in your article.
This is super exciting.
This takes it and makes it way, way more real.
This is where you really do put Python in the browser.
Yeah.
So this is built on top of Pyrodive, I think.
and yeah, just enables you to embed Python inside an HTML file.
and it just works.
Um,
- Yeah, it looks pretty good.
- Opening tag, pi-script inside an HTML file.
Don't need to download anything.
It's pretty incredible.
- You can also say source equals app.pi in your browser.
As long as that can be delivered as a static file,
it'll pull that up and run.
I just, quick follow up on this.
One-- oh, this is a different one.
I'll roll it.
But I do want to point out that I actually--
I don't know if people know this.
I did a video called Python PyScript WebAssembly,
and then I actually created an offline progressive web
app with it.
So once you've installed this app,
it no longer has to download that larger binary.
So if you look at the code, it's like super, super simple.
you can get this cool little offline app.
And it is like launch time down to one second, maybe,
1 and 1/2 seconds.
And it's just so bizarre to write Python
for JavaScript events.
You can say, on click equals, here's
the Python function, and all sorts of stuff.
So people go and check that out.
I'll leave that in the show notes.
But yeah, this is a really big deal,
this WebAssembly stuff that's coming in.
It's coming from these different angles.
coming from Pyodide, from PyScript,
from the core developers compiling to WebAssembly.
All of those things are pretty fantastic.
- Yeah, and it's really cool to see so many people
collaborate on the same thing at once
from so many different parts of the community.
- Yeah, it's true.
It's happening, there's two parts where that's happening,
right, in this GIL thing
and in the WebAssembly side of things, right?
They're not necessarily coordinating,
but they're all working on the same problem
and surely we'll get some good outcomes from that.
All right, let's talk about the Cinder one next.
So this one does come also from Meta, more Instagram,
I suppose, directly.
But this comes from the Cinder project,
and this has to do with some of the optimizations.
You want to tell us about this one?
>>Yeah, so these are essentially async-specific optimizations.
So Cinder, for those who don't know,
is a performance-oriented fork of CPython.
So the Instagram team essentially were like,
we really love Python, but it's a bit too slow
for our web servers if we're gonna have
the whole thing written in Python.
So they forked it and implemented,
there's a ton of different optimizations
implemented in Cinder.
- Many changes, yeah.
There's a ton.
If you check out the Cinder project,
there's just a whole list of all these different things.
Some of them have to do with JIT,
some of them have to do with immortal objects,
and some have to do with other things as well, yeah.
- Yeah. - Async.io.
- Lazy import, so yeah, loads of stuff going on.
Yeah, so with all the attention recently
on making Python faster,
the sender team is hopeful that they will be able to get some of their optimizations
merged into the main branch of CPython. So, this presentation was specifically about some
of the async-specific optimizations that they have been implementing in their fork. So,
Essentially, the issue is to do with
eagerly awaited coroutines.
So if you have a coroutine,
then, you know, generally,
if you have a coroutine function,
you'll call that function,
it will create this coroutine object,
and that coroutine object doesn't do much
until you await it,
and then eventually you get a result back.
But that can be inefficient in some situations.
Because if the task being done in the coroutine
can just finish immediately, then there's
no reason to create that coroutine object.
Right, and to schedule it and to do all the stuff on the loop
and then wait for it, all of that is just overhead, right?
Yeah.
So what's done in the sender fork is they detect when a task
can be immediately finished and don't
bother creating the coroutine object in that case.
>> Right.
So let me see if I can come up with an example for people
that might--
>> Yeah, it's kind of complicated.
>> Yeah, no, it is.
But I think once you get the feel for it, it's no problem.
It's not that bad.
Probably bad to implement, but not bad to understand.
So imagine you have an async function that's
going to call an API, but you might have an in-memory cache
that says, have I already looked this up
for this particular argument?
So your code could say, if this value is in the cache,
just return that value.
Otherwise, await httpx get da da da da da.
So that first case where you call something
that's in the cache, by default in Python
now it's going to still schedule that on the loop and it's going to make it run
on the loop and wait for all that to happen in this inefficient way.
So the optimization is like run it as a regular function until you hit it in a
wait and then go through that process.
Something like that.
Right.
I think so.
Yeah.
That's my understanding of people are going to send me messages and let
me know I got it wrong.
That's the basic idea is there's, there's scenarios where.
In my case, if it's in the cache, it doesn't ever really need to be
traded as a async coroutine ever,
you just get the value back like a regular function.
But if it goes past that, then it does need to be one.
And that's the distinction, I think.
- Yeah.
- Okay, cool.
So there's actually a lot of improvements
and performance things coming from the Cinder project.
There's this one, but there was also the lazy imports,
right, pep690, and that one, and so on.
- Yeah, so yeah, on discuss.python.org,
There's been a, I think the discussion has reached
over a hundred comments now on lazy imports.
So if you have views, that is where to send them.
- Yeah.
- So yeah, so that's a whole different proposal
where you could, which would introduce an API
to enable or disable lazy imports.
So with lazy imports enabled,
so at the moment, all imports in Python are eager.
So if you type in import func tools at the top of a file,
it will execute the entire func tools module
and then put a reference to that module
in your file for you.
Whereas with lazy imports enabled,
it would see the import func tool statement,
and it'd be like, "Meh,
don't gonna do anything with that."
and then wouldn't actually import the module
until the first time FuncTools was referenced
later on down the file.
And then it would actually-- - Right,
because the problem is there's a cost for doing an import.
It's not like a hashing fee,
which might be a compile time thing.
There's an actual runtime cost for every import.
The PEP-8 says all the imports go at the top
to keep them orderly. - Yeah.
- But if there's many apps that might or might not
use some import depending on what part of it runs, right?
- Yeah.
- And so if you could delay that expense
only if you use it, that would be great.
- And this can have a major impact on startup time
for Python CLI apps.
- Yeah, especially.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Nice, okay.
This one.
But the one that we were talking about
is this ASIC optimization.
So that's the one that was actually covered,
but it's just one of the things coming out of Cinder,
which is cool.
- Yes.
- And then I think maybe this path forward
for immortal objects, is that also coming out of Cinder?
- No, that's another one.
- Similar but not the same.
- Yeah, sure.
- Yes, so this is linked to the
Per Interpreter GIL talk, essentially.
So this is one of those proposals
that's kind of very much in the weeds
of how CPython is implemented.
So it's a proposal to introduce
what's known as immortal objects.
So an immortal object is, well, an object that never dies.
So generally in Python, as we were talking about earlier,
objects have reference count,
and if that reference count reaches zero,
then the garbage collector comes along eventually,
and the rest is freeing up memory
that was holding that object.
So this PEP proposes introducing a class of objects
where the reference count would never reach zero,
meaning that the object would never be cleaned up
by the garbage collector and would never die.
So this would have the advantage.
- Why are you bothering to like check and check
on these objects that you know
will never ever have any sort of reasonable way, right?
- So like there's the num singleton, for example,
like it would be quite rare to have a program
that doesn't use none at least once.
- Or the number five, which is pre-allocated, right?
- Yeah.
- As well as the number 200, like the first negative five
in the top 255 or something like that, yeah.
- Yeah.
But nonetheless, Python will like doggedly
keep a reference count for these objects
and track where they are.
Yeah, so for a lot of these, yeah,
pre-allocated object numbers, in-term strings,
the empty tuple, I think, is also a singleton.
The non-singleton, these would all become immortal objects
if this pet was accepted.
And that would have, that would, I think, in the short term, make Python a little bit slower, probably.
So I think a naive implementation makes it slower by around 6%, but with mitigations, you can make it so that the performance impact is marginal.
But then if you do implement immortal objects,
it makes things like a parent up to Gil easier.
It might also simplify no Gil, I think.
>> Yeah, probably.
Because once you know something's immortal,
and probably also immutable, then you can share it all you want.
Yeah.
>> Exactly.
So you don't have to worry about--
yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
>> Yeah, yeah.
So some of that state that's really hard
to create one per interpreter, you're just like,
well, it doesn't change.
So here it is.
>>Yeah.
>>You don't have to check it.
>>It just kind of makes sense when you think about it,
in a way, I think.
Why would you track the reference count for these objects?
>>Exactly.
True and false are never going to be gone, so just forget it.
Just tweak that memory or whatever, right?
Yeah.
>>Yeah.
>>All right, let's see.
What else have we got to cover here?
Maybe the issues in PR backlog?
Sure.
That's one of the, I think that's the longest one.
Okay, yeah, this is a pretty interesting aspect because it has to do with the developer in
Residence, and Lukasch Lange, and all the improvements that having somebody dedicated
to that role has brought, right?
- Yeah, so there are a lot of open issues
and open PRs on CPython Reaper.
So this talk was essentially kind of taking a step back
and looking philosophically about it
and sort of saying, well, what is an issue for?
You know, why there's all these issues.
Some of them haven't had activity on them
for five years or whatever.
like, why is that issue still open?
Like, what is that doing for us really?
- Yeah, yeah.
And also, I guess really quick shout out,
this is from a Reet Kattrail.
- Yes.
- This talk.
So I think that's, it's like two perspectives, right?
You see the person who, when they open their phone
at the bottom, it has 26,214 unread messages,
the first is inbox zero.
Like, you know, it's like, well,
if we can't close this issue
and we can't deal with it within five years,
it's just friction.
That's one side of the argument, I suspect,
is it's friction.
The other people are like, "Well, this is history."
- Yeah. - Historical friction.
What do we do about it?
- Yeah, I know.
So, Sahi Spachaka,
one of the most prolific CPython core developers
who's contributed more to CPython, like I say.
You're saying, well, you know, sometimes I do come back to issues after five years.
And I do, I am planning on working on it, but I'm working on a lot of things and have
hundreds of local branches and I'm working on loads of things at once.
And sometimes I forget about something for five years and then come back to it, which is
which is totally fair.
It is fair.
But I don't think.
Like one person isn't going to fix all of those issues, you know, when you've got.
How many is it now?
Let's see, over 6,500 open issues on the CPython repo.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know how I would actually fall on this.
I mean, on one hand,
I totally get that you want to keep it around.
On the other, if it was something really important,
it would probably resurface again anyway.
You know what I mean?
- Yeah, yeah, no, I completely get that.
I think at the moment, my personal opinion is
we do have too many open issues at the moment,
and a lot of them just aren't ever gonna have,
either aren't gonna get fixed,
or if they are gonna get fixed,
it's not because of the issue being open.
Like somebody else will just come along and be like,
I'm gonna fix this now.
- Yeah, I mean, I feel like you could,
it's on GitHub now, you could apply a tag to it
like closed due to old age or something.
- Yeah. - And just close them.
They can be reopened.
People could go, well, I really wanna see all the ones
that were closed due to old age,
plus the ones that are open.
You know, just create a search that shows that view.
Yeah.
- Somebody's really bored and it's like,
I really wanna fix some Tkinter feature requests
from 20 years ago.
- Can scroll through that, isn't it?
Yeah.
- All right, let's, yeah, for sure.
Okay.
It's an interesting conversation and discussion
and what to think about,
but it's not something that directly affects people.
Like that's the perfect kind of thing
that's like handled at this meeting, right?
'Cause it's really about that.
- Exactly, yeah.
- All right, the final one, the fstring grammar.
We've got fstrings in Python 3.6
and it's one of the most popular languages added recently,
language features.
Everyone loves it.
I've heard people upgrading to 3.6 and beyond,
or throwing away old versions
just so they can write f-strings, which is great.
But it turns out that the actual parser for f-strings
is kind of insane, I had no idea.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, so it's, I think it's,
how many lines of code is it?
I think I wrote it in the article.
- 1,400 lines of custom C parser code
just for f-strings. - Thank you.
- That's separate from the regular parser.
Yeah, so this whole file is just manually handwritten C code
to parse f-strings.
And Pablo brought up this crazy slide on that.
So this talk was by Pablo Goendo Salgado.
He is a core developer, steering council member,
and release manager for Python 3.10 and 3.11.
Yeah, so this is his big project.
So yeah, Pablo put up this crazy slide
showing the dance that the interpreter has to go through
whenever it encounters an F string.
Just like past--
- It sounds really tricky to figure out
'cause you've got all the captured variables.
you gotta figure out how to pass those over.
Then it goes to the parser and it's like, oh, geez.
Okay.
- Yeah.
- So what is the idea?
The idea is to make this part of the regular parser,
just move this over to like the main,
to bring it into the head parser
and all those kinds of things?
Okay.
- Yeah.
So since Python 3.9, Python has had a generated parser.
So like you just write all the grammar rules
down in this file,
according to a mini language for the grammar.
And then a program will generate a very large C file
to passing Python according to those rules.
So it's a much nicer way of doing things.
It's much less error prone
because you can just generate all the C code
instead of writing it all out.
And so Pablo's big idea is,
Yeah, let's just move all this FString passing
into the grammar, do it all at the same time as that.
It'll be much, much cleaner, much nicer to maintain.
And it also has some exciting things for users.
So it will mean that the Core Dev team
will be able to do some big work on improving error messages,
for example, for f-strings, it's currently quite hard to do
because like, if you touch one corner of this C file,
could have a chain reaction through the rest of it
and cause 10 bugs and nobody wants that, so.
- Yeah, that's good.
That's good that the other areas of focus there
has been lately on improving error messages.
That's good. - Yeah.
- 3.10 had improvements just in general for error messages.
- Yeah, and there's been another--
- Maybe it's also from the PEG parser, right?
Like maybe that's related.
if the peg parser already has better error messages
and you can get this into the peg parser,
it'll just bring along better error messages more easily.
- So, like the peg, so yeah,
so the peg parser is smarter than the old parser.
So like the old parser couldn't like look back
when it encountered the syntax error, essentially.
So like if it encountered the syntax error,
it would just kind of throw up its hands and die on you.
Whereas the new parser is able to catch the syntax error
and then kind of look around at context
and then give you a better message
using that context, essentially.
- That's great.
- Yeah.
- All right, well, I think that pretty much,
yeah, yeah, sure, I think that pretty much covers it.
Anything else you wanna mention to people
about the Language Summit?
- Anything else?
>> You wrote it up pretty well, I think.
>> Yeah.
Pyfound.blogspot.com is the address if you want to read that.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> I think we pretty much covered everything.
We've covered a lot, anyway.
>> Yeah, we have covered a lot, Alex. That's great.
All right, well, thanks for all of this
and all your work on the other things as well.
Before we get out of here,
let me ask you the final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
be it 3.12 or something older, what editor are you using?
- Good question.
I'm actually using Idle quite a lot these days.
- Okay, right on.
- Yeah, I used Python for a while.
I've tried out VS Code several times.
I've never really got on with it.
I'm not quite sure why.
I loved all the features PyCharm had,
but nowadays I'm just enjoying something
that just starts up really quickly.
And it's just really simple.
- Simple and simple.
All right, cool.
And then notable PyPI package or library,
something I wanna give a shout out to.
I mean, we kind of sort of did that in a meta sense
with TypeScript, or TypeShed rather.
- Yeah, am I allowed to shout out my own packages?
- You can shout out whatever you want, absolutely.
- I'll just give another shout out to Specialist, I think.
I think that's really cool.
- Okay, yeah, Specialist is neat.
I'm glad I learned about that today, that's cool.
All right, well.
- Then I can seem magnanimous
by shouting out somebody else's project.
[LAUGHS]
There you go.
All right, well, thanks for doing the write-up.
Thanks for taking good notes and sharing it with everyone.
Because while it makes total sense
that the Language Summit is this closed-door story where
people can have open conversations
and just keep it amongst the core developers,
I know everyone in the community really appreciates
having a sense of what's coming, where the focus is,
what people are worried about, and so on.
So thanks for getting that out in the light for us.
- Yeah, no worries, it was fun to do.
Really fun to have this conversation.
- Yeah, you bet.
Thanks.
- Awesome, thanks, Michael.